# Homelab

## Starting the homelab

I found an old mini PC (ASUS Mini PC PN30), left in a drawer from when I thought I needed it to run a Plex media server.
With a sudden (unexpected) burst of motivation I decided to run a local kubernetes cluster on it.
(In hindsight, I think I might also have been inspired to try self-hosting an RSS reader by [this](https://joeyehand.com/blog/2025/01/15/i-ditched-the-algorithm-for-rssand-you-should-too/) post. I just got distracted, by deciding to self-host using kubernetes).

### Making a plan

I asked ChatGPT and Claude for help on how to set up a simple kubernetes setup at home.
After some back-and-forth I landed on installing Debian with no graphical desktop environment, and then installing `k3s`.
The choice of `k3s` was mainly made to limit the resource requirements. The Mini PC is not exactly beefy, with an underpowered CPU and only 4GB RAM (While trying to confirm this number, I found the listing for this on [Amazon](https://www.amazon.com.au/ASUS-Barebone-Integrated-RadeonTM-Bluetooth-PN30-BBE001MV/dp/B07VL3HJGC) and it claims that I can upgrade to 8GB RAM. I might do that at some point).

### Install Debian

I downloaded an ISO of Debian 12 and made a bootable usb.
I connected the Mini PC to a monitor, keyboard and mouse and booted the Debian installer from the usb stick.
I selected graphical installer and followed the guidance.
I did not create a root user, instead letting my own user get sudo privileges.
I did not install a desktop environment.
I gave it the hostname `tyr`.
I made sure to select SSH, to allow access after I unplug the peripherals.

### Install tools

```sh
sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get upgrade
sudo apt-get install -y vim git curl wget htop
```

I tried accessing the mini PC over shh from my desktop.

```sh
ssh kasper@tyr.local
```

This did not work, but using the local IP directly works fine.

I really want to use the `hostname.local` thing, I learned that it is called [mDNS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multicast_DNS), and I need a mDNS service.
I installed [Avahi](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avahi_(software)>), both on my desktop and on the Mini PC

```sh
sudo apt-get install avahi-daemon
```

### Install `k3s`

Now, to install `k3s`. Following docs at <https://k3s.io/>.

```sh
curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | sh - 
```

After a minute, the kubernetes cluster is running and I can query it from `tyr`

```sh
sudo k3s kubectl get node 
# NAME   STATUS   ROLES                  AGE   VERSION
# tyr    Ready    control-plane,master   15h   v1.31.4+k3s1
```

Next, I want to access it from my desktop.
Following the [k3s guide](https://docs.k3s.io/cluster-access) I copy `/etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml` from `tyr` to `~/.kube/config` my desktop with `scp`, and edit the `server` field to point to IP of `tyr`.
I tried a lot get `tyr.local` to resolve instead of the IP, but as far as I can tell, `kubectl` is not using the mDNS stuff from above.
Here is the last chat message (in a long back-and-forth) from `o1` on why `.local` does not work.

> A statically compiled binary often **does not** use the system’s usual NSS (Name Service Switch) mechanisms—like `/etc/nsswitch.conf` and `libnss-mdns`—for hostname resolution. Instead, it typically performs “pure DNS” lookups.
>
> That explains why:
>
> - **ping tyr.local** succeeds, because it honors `nsswitch.conf` and uses Avahi/mDNS.
> - **kubectl** fails on `tyr.local`, because it bypasses your local mDNS setup and tries querying a DNS server that doesn’t know about `.local` names.'

ChatGPT suggest some ways to fix it, but the simplest seemed to be to just plug in the IP.

I made sure to go to my router and reserve the local IP address of `tyr`, so it does not change after a reboot or something.

And finally, I can run the following from my desktop

```sh
kubectl get node 
# NAME   STATUS   ROLES                  AGE   VERSION
# tyr    Ready    control-plane,master   44h   v1.31.4+k3s1
```
